Coursework 2 Component 1: Topic Proposal 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Customer churn is one of the challenges that large companies face due to its effect 
on the revenue, especially for the company gaining revenue from user subscription 
such as telecom company and stream media company. Hence, in this coursework, we 
want  to  build  a  prediction  model  to  predict  the  likelihood  of  churning  for  music 
streaming  app  user  by  using  the  datasets  from  Sparkify.  Sparkify  is  a  virtual  music 
streaming service created by Udacity whereby user can enjoy music without fee by 
watching the advertisement in between songs or subscribe for a premium subscription 
for a fee. The users are allowed to upgrade, downgrade or cancel the subscription at 
any  time.  Generally,  it  takes  lesser  cost  to  keep  and  sustain  the  existing  user  than 
acquire new user. Therefore, we like to predict the user which is likely to churn in order 
to provide targeted offers to these users before they churn and cancel the cancel the 
subscription. 
 
 
1.1  Project Goal 
 
The project goal is to create a binary classifier based on the datasets to analyze the 
activities of the user with Sparkify virtual services and define the user that potential to 
cancel  the  service and  churn.  We  aim  to  study  the  user  churn  from  the  big  data of 
Sparkify  user  logs  and  apply  machine  learning  technique  to  create  an  optimum 
predictive model on user churn. The study also helps us to understand the application 
of PySpark and MLLib. Eventually, our main objective is to compare a few predictive 
models and obtain the accuracy of each model to deploy the best model on user based 
churning prediction through machine learning approach. 
 
 
 
 
1.2  Data Collection and Summary 
 
Due to the size of the datasets which is relatively large, we required to work on the 
data with PySpark, Spark ML and Apache Hadoop. The path to the studied data on 
HDFS is 'hdfs://www.dlmd.com:9000/input/mini_sparkify_event_data.json'. In this 
coursework, we will be using the subset of the 12gb data which contain 286,500 rows 
and 18 columns of data.   
 
The data file is in JSON format, and it was read by PySpark dataframe for the analysis 
and model prediction. By running jsondataframe.printSchema(), we are able to contain 
the  features  of  the  datasets.  The  features  from  the  user  log  included  artist  name, 
authentication  method,  user  first  name,  user  gender,  user  last  name,  length  of  the 
song  that  user  listened,  user  subscription  level  either  paid  or  free,  user  location, 
service method, service interaction page, user registration timestamp, session id, song 
name by user, status, timestamp of user service, web browser used and the user id. 
These features can be categorized as user information, Sparkify service information, 
user service event and artist information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3  Method-Data Pre-processing and Cleaning 
 
To  begin  with  the  analysis  and  construct  the  predictive  model,  we  will  import  all 
necessary  classification  and  evaluation  libraries  from  pyspark.sql  and  pyspark.ml. 
Then, a Spark session is built.  
 
 
Upon importing the libraries, the data is loaded from the HDFS path followed by data 
cleaning  and  pre-processing.  The  table  below  shows  the  preview  of  Sparkify  user 
interaction log the from the top five row. 




In data cleaning, we first remove data with null or NA records in userID field as null 
record  will  affect  the  outcome  of  churn  prediction.  Besides,  we  also  remove  any 
duplicated userID from the data and we observe that there is 225 distinct user ID in 
this subset of datasets.  
 
All the timestamp used in the datasets are in milliseconds unit of measure. Therefore, 
we converted the timestamp to seconds and run the timestamp by strftime() to convert 
the time to string format of Year-Month-Date, Hour-Minutes-Seconds. 
 
Apart from that, we also pre-process the important features such as user location, the 
device and browser that user used for streaming Sparkify. 
 
The most critical feature for churn prediction model on streaming platform is the page 
feature which hold the interaction and event logs of users on Sparkify. Based on the 
preview code, we can retrieve all event logs from “page” and cancellation confirmation 
from  the  log  indicating  the  churn  of  user.  From  this  dataset,  we  observed  52 
cancellation confirmation events. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4 Method-Exploratory Data Analysis 
 
A function is created for cancellation confirmation to label the churn of user. From the 
event logs, user that hit on cancellation confirmation will be label as count 1 whereas 
it will be 0 for active user. To summarize, 23.1% of the user churn from Sparkify while 
76.9% of users are active user, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After  determining  the  user  churn  percentage,  we  want  to  study  and  analysis  the 
relationship between various features and the churn rate. Firstly, we analyze the user 
churn from gender view. Based on the results, the churn user consists of 61.5% male 
and 38.5% female. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the device used to stream Sparkify, 46.15% of user churn using Windows, 36.5% 
using Macintosh, 7.6% using iPhone while 9.6% using X11. As for the browser used 
for  churn  user,  67.3%  using  Safari,  30.77%  using  Firefox  while  1.9%  using  Gecko. 
Therefore, we know that the highest number of device and browser used to stream 
Sparkify for churned users are Windows and Safari respectively. 
 
 
By working on the location feature, we observed that highest number of churned users 
are from California state. 
 
 
The free user usually churns as compared to paid user as 56.1% of churned user are 
user using the free services. 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
The user most visited page on the event logs is “next song” event whereby user is 
streaming the next music whereas the lowest event is “settings” 
 
 
The user listened to King of Leon and Coldplay at the highest frequency on Sparkify. 
 
 
 
1.5 Method-Feature Engineering 
 
Upon completion of data cleaning and exploratory data analysis, we want to extract 
and analyze the feature which is meaningful for a prediction classification model from 
the log file. There are 17 features being engineered to determine the possible impact 
of the features on the training model.

Features Description 
User ID Unique user ID 
Gender User gender 
Label Churn label, 1 = churn, 0 = active 
Location_state User location 
Device User device 
Browser User browser 
Level User level (free or paid service) 
Lifetime User’s time spent on Sparkify 
Session_count Number of user session  
Unique_song_count Number of different song user listened 
to 
Like_song_count Number of songs liked by user 
Like_song_count_ratio Ratio of liked songs 
Dislike_song_count Number of songs disliked by user 
Dislike_song_count_ratio Ratio of disliked songs 
Collect_song_count Number of songs favorited by user 
Collect_song_count_ratio Ratio of favorited songs 
 
By converting the data features to Panda data frame, we vectorized the features by 
using string indexer and one hot encoder converter. One Hot Encoding is the process 
of transforming categorical variables into numerical format before fitting and training a 
Machine  Learning  algorithm  while  string  indexer  helps  to  convert  categorical  string 
columns in a Data Frame into numerical indices. By vectorization of all the features, 
we are able to fit the variables and analyzed the correlation of these features with the 
label count. 
 
 
A heatmap is produced to plot the correlation among all 17 features.  The closer to 
value 1.0 (blue) in heatmap indicating the stronger is the correlation between features. 
However, in order to study and analyze the churn, we mainly focus on the correlation 
between  all  features  with  the  label  feature  as  the  label  indicating  whether  the  user 
churn or active. 
 
 
We sort out the correlation of all features with label by descending order from positive 
to negative value. Positive correlation indicating the variables are moving in tandem 
with  label  feature  in  the  same  direction  whereas  negative  correlation  indicating  the 
variables is moving in opposite direction. The closer the correlation to either 1 or -1 
indicating strong correlation whereas the correlation is weak if the value is closer to 0. 
Therefore, to build the predictive model, we will remove device_index and 
browser_index from the training as these features are close to 0 indicating their weak 
correlation with label count which represent user churn. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After defining the important features that have strong correlation with user churn, we 
will finalize the features list for model training. VectorAssembler is used to gather the 
vectorized  variables  follow  by  running  StandardScaler  to  standardize  the  variables 
value  to  standard  format  since  the  value  for  different  features  could  have  different 
range. For example, event value could be up to 1000 but ratio value can only be 0 to 
1. After all the standardization, we create the features pipeline and ready to execute 
Machine Learning. 
The dataset is split into two parts whereby 70% of random data is categorized as train 
data and 30% is categorized as test data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.6 Method- Model Training 
 
By splitting the dataset to train data and test data, we proceeded with model creation 
and  training.  In  this  coursework,  we  will  apply  four  approaches  to  compare  the 
accuracy  of  model  and  determine  the  optimum  model  to  predict  user  churn.  Four 
machine learning approaches are logistic regression, random forest, decision tree and 
gradient boosted tree (GBT).  
 
 
1.7 Method- Model Evaluation 
 
By training the data with different classifier, we want to conclude which model provides 
best prediction on user churn. Therefore, we evaluated the four models based on their 
accuracy and f1 score. Accuracy is the percentage of correct predictions for the test 
data, the value of accuracy is between 0 to 1, the closer the value to 1 indicating the 
better accuracy. On the other hand, f1 score is a machine learning evaluation metric 
that measures a model's accuracy. It combines the precision and recall scores of a 
model.  The  accuracy  metric  computes  how  many  times  a  model  made  a  correct 
prediction across the entire dataset. F1 score is usually more useful than 

accuracy, especially when there is uneven class distribution. The value of f1 score is 
between 0 to 1, the closer the value to 1 indicating the better model is working. 
 
Based on the calculation, we observe that random forest model obtains the highest 
accuracy  and  f1  score  of  0.81  as  compared  to  decision  tree,  GBT  and  logistic 
regression. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coursework 2 Component 3: Summary & Conclusion 
 
2. Conclusion 
 
In summary, we able to study the Sparkify dataset on the user churn topic and created 
functions  for  the  modelling  process.  The  dataset  possesses  sufficient  quality  with 
predictive features. In this project, we trained four model to find an optimum model to 
predict  churn  for  future  deployment.  The  model  that  we  trained  included  logistic 
regression, decision tree, GBT and random forest.  
 
The main challenges and complication we found was that the feature selection of the 
dataset was not trivial. The choice of the features has limitation in power and memory. 
Therefore,  we  use  the  subset  of  the  dataset  to  obtain  good  understanding  of  the 
Sparkify users’ behavior. We able to identify the user churn and transform the raw data 
into a meaningful binary classification predictive model.  
 
The best model we observed from our work is the random forest model with both the 
highest  accuracy  and  f1  score  as  compared  to  0.7  accuracy  in  decision  tree,  0.73 
accuracy in GBT and 0.75 accuracy in logistic regression. Overall, we able to deploy 
HDFS, PySpark and MLLib to apply machine learning technique on model training for 
user churn. This approach can also be applied similarly on other dataset to study on 
user churn on any subscription services.  
 
In  the  future,  to  improve  the  model,  we  may  need  more  data  on  user  behavior  to 
understand the reason of user churn. We may include a study on sentiment analysis 
to study the impact of emotional aspect on the churn of user as the user may churn 
due  to  many  reasons  for  example,  they  do  not  find  any  songs  that  they  like  or  the 
Spakify platform is not user friendly instead of just making a conclusion that the user 
churn due to subscription fee and hence provide more discount on the fee. 
 
 
3. Total number of words 
 
Word counts excluding cover page, codes, figure, and references: 1965 words 
4. References 
 
1. Ahmad, A. K. (2019). Customer churn prediction in telecom using machine 
learning in big data platform. Retrieved from 
https://journalofbigdata.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40537-019-0191-
6 
2. Almuqren, L. (2021). An Empirical Study on Customer Churn Behaviours 
Prediction Using Arabic Twitter Mining Approach. Retrieved from 
https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/13/7/175 
3. Cochet, C. (2021). Predicting customer churn for a popular music streaming 
service. Retrieved from https://github.com/ChristopherCochet/sparkify-
customer-churn-prediction 
4. Forhad, N. (2014). Churn analysis: Predicting churners. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/295257947_Churn_analysis_Predict
ing_churners 
5. Prabadevi, B. (2023). Customer churning analysis using machine learning 
algorithms. Retrieved from 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666603023000143 
6. Tozatto, T. (2022). Churn Prediction for Music Streaming App — Sparkify. 
Retrieved from https://blog.devgenius.io/churn-prediction-for-music-streaming-
app-sparkify-d6e26d1ac80f